Lest we focus too much on failure,
I'd like to outline
a few key foundational requirements for a successful data science initiative.
The first of these is deep intuition and knowledge of the business and problem context.
Data science requires a marriage of
technical knowledge about the possible applications of data science,
and deep knowledge of the business context of the problem you're trying to address.
Initiating data science projects with a lack of
either one of these is going to lead to risks of trouble.
Your problem context must drive your decisions about model development.
In practice, I often see this play out in the other direction.
Over time, machine learning specialists
naturally develop affinities for certain approaches.
As expertise in a given algorithmic family grows,
it's tempting to fit problems to a favored algorithmic approach
as opposed to matching an algorithmic approach to whatever the problem may require.
Contextual knowledge helps prioritize the timing of projects as well.
Areas likely to benefit from data science tend to be
good initial projects as quick wins can
help foster stake holder enthusiasm and generate momentum.
Second, data science initiatives that are
successful require relevant and high quality data.
There's no getting around the fact that data quality is
a necessary but not sufficient condition for data science success.
You can have world class machine learning experts
able to implement state of the art models,
but if you do not have quality data that's relevant for your problem context,
you're not likely to see success out of your data science project.
Third, you must have a versatile computational toolbox.
Your data science experts must be able to implement high quality data pre-processing,
generate informative data visualizations to explain the model to non-technical experts,
and apply the appropriate modeling tools for the context at hand.
Your toolbox must be appropriately used as well.
Even if you have a great model,
if you over fit the data to that model,
the results will not generalize to cases likely to be encountered in production.